Advanced Functional Programming TDA342/DIT260 (Online Exam)
=========

<div class="alert alert-info">
The whole exam is in a `.pdf` file in case you have connection problems. Search
for the file `exam.pdf` in the Files tab.
</div>

<table class="table table-bordered">
<tr>
    <td class="success">Date</td>
    <td class="alert-info">Saturday, 21 March 2020</td>
</tr>

<tr>
    <td class="success">Time</td>
    <td class="alert-info">8:30 - 12:30 (4hs) </td>
</tr>

<tr>
    <td class="success">Submission window</td>
    <td class="alert-info"> 12:30 - 12:40 </td>
</tr>
</table>

Preliminaries
======

<div class="alert alert-info">
  Below you find the information that it is often on the **first page of a paper exam**
</div>


* Remember to take ten minutes to submit your online exam. There is a submission
  window (12:30 - 12:40), but if you finish the exam before, you can submit it
  as you did when submitting regular assignments ahead of time.

* The maximum amount of points you can score on the exam: 60 points. The grade for the
  exam is as follows:
  - Chalmers students:
    * 3: 24 - 35 points
    * 4: 36 - 47 points
    * 5: 48 - 60 points
  - GU students:
    * Godkänd: 24-47 points
    * Väl godkänd: 48-60 points
  - PhD student: 36 points to pass.

* Results will be available within 21 days from the exam date.

* Notes:

  - Read through the exam first and plan your time.
  - Answers preferably in English, some assistants might not read Swedish.
  - If a question does not give you all the details you need, you may make reasonable
    assumptions. Your assumptions must be clearly stated. If your solution only works
    under certain conditions, state them.
  - *As a recommendation*, consider spending around 1h 20 minutes per
    exercise. However, this is only a recommendation.
  - To see your exam: by appointment (*send email to Alejandro Russo*)

Preliminaries about this online exam
======

<div class="alert alert-info">
  Below you find the information that is related to **the online exam**
</div>

* Please note that this is an exam to be carried out individually, and since
  this is an exam from home, we will be very strict with plagiarism.

* This exam considers that you will have open books as well as Internet access,
  i.e., access to the course's content and code,
  [Hoogle](https://hoogle.haskell.org/), etc. -- and you can use all of such
  resources!

* The exam consists on *programming exercises* and *multiple questions*.
  - You will get a source code skeleton for each coding exercise that you need
  to complete.
  - Each question is to be answered as a comment in your source code. There are
  specific places in the source code indicating where to write your answer.

* The exam is designed to **not need any special Haskell package**. It is
  enough to use the ones imported by each source file.

What and how to submit
======

* You should submit the code skeleton **completed with your solution and
  answers**. The code skeleton can be found below.

  <table class="table table-bordered">
  <tr>
    <td class="success">Code skeleton (Check Files tab)</td>
    <td class="alert-info">mocked-exam-0.1.0.0.tar.gz</td>
  </tr>
  </table>

* Before you submit your code, please clean it up! We will use the same
  requirements for clean code as in the course's assignments, that is, clean code
  - does not have long (> 80 characters) lines
  - has a consistent layout
  - has type signatures for all top-level functions
  - has good comments for all modules, functions, data types and instances.
  - has no junk (junk is unused code, code which is commented out, unnecessary comments)
  - has no overly complicated function definitions
  - does not contain any repetitive code (copy-and-paste programming)

* **Use `cabal sdist` to generate the source tarball that you will submit**. Make
  sure the tarball is working by extracting it in another directory and running
  `cabal configure` and `cabal build` and checking that everything looks right.

* **In addition, submit the files `Ex1.hs`, `Ex2.hs`, and `Ex3.hs` with your
  solutions and answers in Canvas and make sure that they are not part of any
  directory/folder**, i.e., we want just plain `.hs` files. This helps us to grade
  your submission fast since Canvas does not understand `.tar.gz` files.


Exercise 1 (22 points)
===============

File `src/Exam/Ex1.hs`

This exercise is based on the module *Type-based modeling* of the course. If you
do not remember it, do not worry, we will briefly recap it here.
[In any case, the content of the lecture is
available.](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/edu/year/2017/course/TDA342_Advanced_Functional_Programming/lecture13.html)

We consider a simple (non-monadic) DSL for integers and booleans
expressions. The DSL gets implemented in a deep-embedded manner.

```haskell
data Expr where
  -- Constructors
  LitI   :: Int  -> Expr
  LitB   :: Bool -> Expr
  -- Combinators
  (:+:)  :: Expr -> Expr -> Expr
  (:==:) :: Expr -> Expr -> Expr
  If     :: Expr -> Expr -> Expr -> Expr
```

and the run function, which is the most interesting piece of the code:

```haskell
eval :: Expr -> Value
```

Since expressions can be reduced to integers or booleans, an element of type
`Value` is either an integer or a boolean.

```haskell
data Value = VInt Int | VBool Bool
```

There are some aspects of this implementation that we need to remark.

1. This DSL allows to evaluate ill-typed expressions, so calling `eval` can fail
  miserably but we do not worry about that here.

  ```haskell
  > eval (LitB True :==: LitI 42)
  *** Exception: Crash!
  ```

2. You can inspect the *type of values* as follows.

  ```haskell
  > showTypeOfVal (eval (LitI 42))
  "Int"
  > showTypeOfVal (eval (LitB True :==: LitB False))
  "Bool"
  ```

3. You can also nicely print objects of the EDSL as follows.

  ```haskell
  > show  $ If (LitB False) (LitI 2) (LitI 2 :+: LitI 1736)
  "if False then 2 else 2 + 1736"
  ```
4. You can *randomly* generate terms of type `Expr` as follows.

   ```haskell
   > import Test.QuickCheck
   > generate (arbitrary :: Gen Expr)
   if (if True + True then if -22 then False else False else -8 + -20) == True
   then 16 else -13 == (False == -6) + 4 + (if False then -19 else True)
   ```

   The output that you get when running `generate (arbitrary :: Gen Expr)`
   surely varies due to the randomness used by QuickCheck.

In this exercise, your goal is to extend the EDSL to work with lists. So, we
extend the EDSL with two new constructors (`Nil` and `Cons`) as follows.

```haskell
data Expr where
  LitI   :: Int  -> Expr
  LitB   :: Bool -> Expr
  (:+:)  :: Expr -> Expr -> Expr
  (:==:) :: Expr -> Expr -> Expr
  If     :: Expr -> Expr -> Expr -> Expr
  Nil    :: Expr                         -- new
  Cons   :: Expr -> Expr -> Expr         -- new
```

To help you out along the way, we have include many test cases (definitions
`test1`, `test2`, .., `test11`).

Task 1.1 (5 pts)
------

Extend the pretty printing of the language, i.e., definition of `showsPrec`, to
consider lists. For instance, your solution should produce the following
outputs.

```haskell
> let test1 = Nil in show test1  -- def. test1
"[]"
> let test2 = Cons (LitI 1) (Cons (LitB True) Nil) in show test2
"[1,True]"
> let test3 = Cons (LitI 1) (Cons (LitB True) (Cons (LitI 42) Nil)) in show test3
"[1,True,42]"
> show test6 -- see def. test6
"[[1,True],[1,True,42]]"
```

It is Ok for your function to crash when the list is ill-formed.

```haskell
> show $ Cons (LitI 42) (LitB True)
"[*** Exception: The list got broken
```

Task 1.2 (5 pts)
-----

Extend `arbExpr :: Int -> Gen Expr` to generate also lists.
- Make sure that you do not generate empty lists.
- Keep in mind that your extension to `arbExpr` very often will generate
  ill-typed terms like `Cons (LitI 42) (LitB True)` and it is Ok!

  ```haskell
  > generate (arbitrary :: Gen Expr)
  [-29]
  > generate (arbitrary :: Gen Expr)
  (if if True then -18 else [(if if [*** Exception: The list got broken
  ```

Do not worry much about these two points. We will clarify them later on.

Task 1.3 (10 pts)
----

Extend the definition of `Value` and `eval` to consider lists.
- Comparison between lists is `True` **only**  when both lists have
the same length and the elements are equal point-wise.
  ```haskell
  > show test5
  "[1,True] == [1,True,42]"
  > eval test5
  VBool False
  > show test7
  "[[1,True],[1,True,42]] == [[1,True],[1,True,42]]"
  > eval test7
  VBool True
  ```
- Addition between lists is *only* defined  when  both lists contain numbers. The
addition is performed point-wise.
  ```haskell
  > show test8
  "[1,2]"
  > show test9
  "[100,1]"
  > show test10
  "[1,2] + [100,1]"
  > eval test10 -- it should result in the list [101,3]
  ...
  > show test11
  "[[1,2]] + [[100,1]]"
  > eval test11 -- it fails since it is adding a list of lists
  *** Exception: Problems adding lists!
  ```

Task 1.4 (2 pts)
----

Extend function `showTypeOfEval` to display `[Value]` when dealing with
expressions which evaluate to lists.

```haskell
> show test2
"[1,True]"
> showTypeOfVal (eval test2)
"[Value]"
> show test6
"[[1,True],[1,True,42]]"
> showTypeOfVal (eval test6)
"[Value]"
```

Exercise 2 (38 points)
======

File `src/Exam/Ex2.hs`

To avoid evaluating many of the ill-form expressions in the DSL from Exercise 2,
e.g., `Ex2.eval (Ex2.LitB True :==: Ex2.LitI 42)`, we saw during the
[lectures](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/edu/year/2017/course/TDA342_Advanced_Functional_Programming/lecture13.html)
how to use `GADTs` and implement a typed DSL. We briefly recapitulate what we
did here. From now on, all definitions related to the previous exercises are
referred in a qualified form as `Ex2`.

1. We introduced a GADT of the form `Expr t`, where t is a Haksell type which
   indicates the value that the expression denotes.

   ```haskell
   data Expr t where
     LitI   :: Int -> Expr Int
     LitB   :: Bool -> Expr Bool
     (:+:)  :: Expr Int -> Expr Int -> Expr Int
     (:==:) :: Eq t => Expr t -> Expr t -> Expr Bool
     If     :: Expr Bool -> Expr t -> Expr t -> Expr t
   ```

   For instance, now the expression `LitB True :==: LitI 42` is not well-typed
   for Haskell.

   ```haskell
   >:t LitB True :==: LitI 42
   error:
      • Couldn't match type ‘Int’ with ‘Bool’
        Expected type: Expr Bool
          Actual type: Expr Int
   ```

2. The DSL's run function is

   ```haskell
   eval :: Expr t -> t
   ```

   which knows the resulting type of the evaluation, i.e., `t`, so it is not
   necessary to keep *typing tags* around during evaluation (like `Ex2.VInt`
   and `Ex2.VBool` in the previous exercise).

3. We show that this DSL (based on `Expr t`) is more restrictive than the one
   in the previous exercise (based on `Ex2.Expr`) by removing the typing
   information. The function `forget` takes a term in `Expr t` and builds one in
   `Ex2.Expr`.

   ```haskell
   forget :: Expr t -> Ex2.Expr
   ```

4. We use some advanced Haskell's type-system to check
   if an expression of type `Ex2.Expr` has a valid type by rewriting it into one
   of type `Expr t` for some `t`, which is done by function `infer`.

   ```haskell
   infer :: Ex2.Expr -> Maybe TypedExpr
   ```

5. We implement a function `evalT` as a safe wrapper on `Ex2.eval`:

   ```haskell
   evalT :: Ex2.Expr -> Maybe Ex2.Value
   ```
   This function only calls `Ex2.eval` if the given argument is well-typed.

6. There is a property written in QuickCheck that says that the result produced
   by `evalT` should match that of `Ex2.eval`. In that way, we have not changed the
   semantics of our DSL when we moved to a more *typed discipline*.

   ```haskell
   prop_eval :: Ex2.Expr -> Property
   ```
   You can check the property as follows:
   ```haskell
   > main
   +++ OK, passed 100 tests:
   51% Bool
   49% Int
   ```

   which indicates that the test has passed, where QuickCheck generated 51% and
   49% of well-typed Boolean and integer expressions `Ex2.Expr`, respectively.


Task 2.1 (5 pts)
------

The good aspects of using `GADTs` in this way is that it allows to check for the
well-form of lists, lists of lists, lists of lists of lists, etc. Extend the
definition of `Expr t` to consider constructor `Nil` and `Cons`

```haskell
data Expr t where
  LitI   :: Int -> Expr Int
  LitB   :: Bool -> Expr Bool
  (:+:)  :: Expr Int -> Expr Int -> Expr Int
  (:==:) :: Eq t => Expr t -> Expr t -> Expr Bool
  If     :: Expr Bool -> Expr t -> Expr t -> Expr t
  Nil    :: Expr t  -- change this
  Cons   :: Expr t  -- change this
```

and make sure that your extension allows to build the following examples:

```haskell
ok1 = Cons (LitI 1) (Cons (LitI 2) Nil)                       -- [1,2]
ok2 = Cons (Cons (LitI 1) Nil) (Cons (Cons (LitI 2) Nil) Nil) -- [[1],[2]]
```

and rejects these ones:

```haskell
bad1 = Cons (LitI 1) (Cons (LitB True) Nil)         -- [1,True]
bad2 = Cons (Cons (LitI 1) Nil) (Cons (LitI 2) Nil) -- [[1],2]
```

Task 2.2 (2 pts)
----

Extend the definition of `forget` to consider the cases for `Nil` and `Cons`.


Task 2.3 (3 pts)
-----

Extend `eval` with the cases for `Nil` and `Cons`.
  - At this point, we ignore how to extend `(:+:)` and `(:==:)` to consider  lists.

Task 2.4 (5 pts)
----

Extend `eval` to consider the addition and comparison of lists. The addition and
comparison of lists should have the same semantics as the previous exercise. For
instance, we only consider addition of lists of numbers when both lists have the
same length.

Task 2.5 (10 pt)
----

Function `infer` relies on the GADT `Type t`, which indicates the type of
expressions:

```haskell
data Type t where
  TInt  :: Type Int
  TBool :: Type Bool
```

Importantly, function `(=?=)` implements equality of types by returning `Just Refl` for those cases where `s` and `t` are the same time:

```haskell
(=?=) :: Type s -> Type t -> Maybe (Equal s t)
```

Extend the definition of `Type t`, `Show (Type t)`, and `(=?=)` to consider
lists.

Task 2.6 (8 pts)
----

In this task, you should extend the definition of `infer` to work with lists.
Before doing that, we need to clarify a problem inherent to the approach we have
followed in our DSL.

What should be the inferred type of the empty list ?

```haskell infer Ex1.Nil ```

Well, in principle, `Ex1.Nil` could be a list of integer, booleans, list of list
of integer, list of list of boolean, and so on. *So, we do not know the type of
the empty list by just looking at the empty list*. We need either:

  1. more context, i.e., to see how the empty list gets used,
  2. support for type variables, or
  3. support for polymorphism.

We are going to pursue option 2 and 3. Instead, we stick to option 1. An easy
fix is to disallow to type empty lists and only lists of size, *at least* one.
So, `infer` will raise an error when trying to infer the type of just `Nil`:

```haskell
infer e =
  ...
  E.Nil -> error "Sorry, I cannot type an empty list alone!"
```

However, `infer` should be defined for lists of size, at least, one. That is why
in Exercise 1, Task 1.2, you were asked to *not* generate empty lists.

Task 2.7 (5 pt)
----

Extend `evalT`
